Minimal API filters /1 (#26188)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters.md

* Logging information about the request and response.
* Validating that a request is targeting a supported API version.

Filters can be registered by providing a [Delegate](/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/delegates/) that takes a [`RouteHandlerInvocationContext`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerInvocationContext.cs) and returns a [`RouteHandlerFilterDelegate`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerFilterDelegate.cs). The `RouteHandlerInvocationContext` provides access to the `HttpContext` of the request and an `Arguments` list indicating the arguments passed to the handler in the order in which they appear in the declaration of the handler.

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet1)]

The preceding code:

* Calls the `AddFilter` extension method to add a filter to the `/colorSelector/{color}` endpoint.
* Returns the color specified except for the `Red`.
* Returns [Results.Problem](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.Results.Problem%2A) when the `/colorSelector/Red` is requested.

> * Uses `next` as the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` and `rhiContext` as the `RouteHandlerInvocationContext`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Uses `next` as the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` and `rhiContext` as the `RouteHandlerInvocationContext` to invoke the next filter in the pipeline or the request delegate if the last filter has been invoked.
```

The filter is run before the endpoint handler. When multiple `AddFilter` invocations are made on a handler:

* Filter code called before the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` (`next`) is called are executed in order of First In, First Out (FIFO) order.
* Filter code called after the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` (`next`) is called are executed in order of First In, Last Out (FILO) order.

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet_xyz)]

In the preceding code, the filters log the following output:

```dotnetcli
Before first filter
    Before 2nd filter
        Before 3rd filter
            Endpoint
        After 3rd filter
    After 2nd filter
After first filter
```

The following code uses filters that implement the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet_abc)]

In the preceding code, the filters and handlers logs show the order they are run:

```dotnetcli
ArouteFilter Before next
BrouteFilter Before next
CrouteFilter Before next
      Endpoint
CrouteFilter After next
BrouteFilter After next
ArouteFilter After next
```

> Filters implementing the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface is explained later in this document. The `ArouteFilter`, `BrouteFilter`, and `CrouteFilter` filters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Filters implementing the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface are shown in the example below:
```

---
title: Filters in Minimal API applications
author: rick-anderson
description: Use filters in Minimal API applications
ms.author: riande
ms.date: 6/22/2022
monikerRange: '>= aspnetcore-7.0'
uid: fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters
---
# Filters in Minimal API apps

By [Rick Anderson](https://twitter.com/RickAndMSFT)

Minimal API filters allow developers to implement business logic that supports:

* Running code before the route handler.
* Inspecting and modifying parameters provided during a route handler invocation.
* Intercepting the response behavior of a route handler.

Filters can be helpful in the following scenarios:

* Validating the request parameters and body that are sent to an endpoint.
* Logging information about the request and response.
* Validating that a request is targeting a supported API version

> Filters can be registered by providing a [Delegate](/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/delegates/) that takes a [`routeHandlerInvocationContext`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerInvocationContext.cs) and returns  a [`RouteHandlerFilterDelegate`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerFilterDelegate.cs). The `RouteHandlerInvocationContext` provides access to the `HttpContext` associated with the request and a `Arguments` list indicating the arguments passed to the handler in the order in which they appear in the argument list of the handler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filters can be registered by providing a [Delegate](/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/delegates/) that takes a [`RouteHandlerInvocationContext`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerInvocationContext.cs) and returns  a [`RouteHandlerFilterDelegate`](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Http/Http.Abstractions/src/RouteHandlerFilterDelegate.cs). The `RouteHandlerInvocationContext` provides access to the `HttpContext` of the request and a `Arguments` list indicating the arguments passed to the handler in the order in which they appear in the argument list of the handler.
```

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet1)]

The preceding code:

* Calls the `AddFilter` extension method to add a filter to the `/colorSelector/{color}` endpoint.
* Returns the color specified except for the `Red`.
* Returns [Results.Problem](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http.Results.Problem%2A) when the `/colorSelector/Red` is requested.

> * Uses `next` as the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` and `rhiContext` as the `routeHandlerInvocationContext`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Uses `next` as the `RouteHandlerFilterDelegate` and `rhiContext` as the `RouteHandlerInvocationContext`.
```

The filter is run before the endpoint handler. When multiple `AddFilter` invocations are made on a handler:

* The filters are executed in order of First In, First Out (FIFO) order.

> * The first filter registered runs first, the last filter registered runs last.

Author: In #25483 it states:
 When multiple AddFilter invocations are made on a handler, the filters will be executed in order of FILO order, so the first filter registered will run last.

In a previous preview when I tested it seems like they were FILO, but now they're FIFO

Reviewer 2: Yeah, from the log it is also FIFO,

```
info: Filters.RouteFilters.ABCrouteFilters[0]
      Executing filter method Filters.RouteFilters.ArouteFilter
info: Filters.RouteFilters.ABCrouteFilters[0]
      Executing filter method Filters.RouteFilters.BrouteFilter
info: Filters.RouteFilters.ABCrouteFilters[0]
      Executing filter method Filters.RouteFilters.CrouteFilter
```

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet_xyz)]

In the preceding code, the filters log the following output:

```dotnetcli
info: Filters[0]
      First filter
info: Filters[0]
      2nd filter
info: Filters[0]
      3rd filter

```

The following code uses filters that implement the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface:

[!code-csharp[](~/fundamentals/minimal-apis/min-api-filters/7samples/Filters/Program.cs?name=snippet_abc)]

In the preceding code, the filters and handlers are executed in the following order:

* `ArouteFilter` -> `BrouteFilter` -> `CrouteFilter` -> route handler
* The `next` delegate (`RouteHandlerFilterDelegate`) for `FilterA` is `FilterB` and so on.

> Filters implementing the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface and explained later in this document. The `ArouteFilter`, `BrouteFilter`, and `CrouteFilter` filters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Filters implementing the `IRouteHandlerFilter` interface is explained later in this document. The `ArouteFilter`, `BrouteFilter`, and `CrouteFilter` filters:
```
